Create query-by-example.md (#49)
Dynatrace/dynatrace-api: metric-example/query-by-example.md

```
builtin:host.cpu.system,builtin:host.cpu.user
```

Since this usage pattern is often used, there is a shorthand for it. Instead of a plain word, a dot-separated selector component can also be a _tuple_, which defines multiple alternatives in parentheses. The following is semantically identical to the above selector:

```
builtin:host.cpu.(system,user)
```

To filter the descriptor collection down to these two metrics, provide them as a `metricSelector` query parameter (not path parameter):
```
GET {base}/metrics?metricSelector=builtin:host.cpu.(system,user)
Accept: text/csv
```

# Scenario 4: List Metric Sub-Trees with Wildcards

>**Task**
>We would like to search for all metrics for a certain topic.

Sometimes, we are not only interested in similar keys with a common parent, but we want all metrics in a specific sub-tree. For instance, how do we find out about all CPU-related Host metrics? We can easily use a wildcard selector for this purpose:

```
builtin:host.cpu.*
```

> Note that wildcard selectors are allowed for descriptor queries, but not for bulk metric data queries. Such bulk queries have an upper bound of twelve metrics at a time, and allowing wildcards for query will make adding new metric keys a breaking change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that wildcard selectors are allowed for descriptor queries, but not for bulk metric data queries. Such bulk queries have an upper bound of twelve metrics at a time, and allowing wildcards in a query would make adding new metric keys a breaking change.

```

# Scenario 5: Full-text Metric Search

>**Task**
>We would like to search for all metrics that mention a specific concept in their ID, display name, or description.

Not all CPU metrics are captured on host level, like `builtin:host.cpu.system`. How do we find out about CPU metrics on PGI or container level?

Let's use the `text` parameter with `/metrics` and set it to "cpu" to search for other CPU-related metrics:

```
GET /api/v2/metrics?text=cpu
```

Turns out there are a whole lot of other metrics related to CPU! Most of them include `cpu` in the metric key, but e.g. `builtin:cloud.kubernetes.cluster.cores` does not. Why does it show up in the result, then? It does because `text` also uses the display name and the description for this search. This is also what the Data Explorer uses to present available metrics when you start typing into the metric field.

> # Scenario 6: Querying Timeseries Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scenario 6: Querying Time Series Data

```
DT language guidelines

>**Task**
>We would like to query CPU usage on some hosts during the last 2 weeks.

Querying works by supplying a metric selector to the `{base}/metrics/query?metricSelector={selector}` end point. Assuming we are interested in the average utilized CPU time of all hosts in our cluster individually we might issue the following request:

```
GET {base}/metrics/query?metricSelector=builtin:host.cpu.usage
```

Note that while not strictly part of the metric selector, there are some closely related GET parameters. If they are left out, default parameters are assumed:

| Query parameter | Example | Default value | Description |
|:---|---|---|---|

> | `from` | `1554798800839` | `now-2w` | Lower bound of query time frame |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `from` | `1554798800839` | `now-2w` | Lower bound of query timeframe |

```
This conforms to our language guidelines

> | `to` | `2019-06-03` | `now` | Upper bound of query time frame |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `to` | `2019-06-03` | `now` | Upper bound of query timeframe |

```

```
GET {base}/metrics/query/builtin:host.cpu.usage:(min,max)
```
To check for available aggregation techniques, obtain the array in `/metrics/<metric ID>` under the `"aggregationTypes"` field. Depending on the metric, any of the following might be supported and hence contained in the array:

| Aggregation | Meaning | Uses |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `min` | Aggregate time slot values into one by selecting the lowest value, ignoring `null` | CPU, Traffic, Load time, etc. |
| `max` | Aggregate time slot values into one by selecting the highest value, ignoring `null` | CPU, Traffic, Load time, etc. |
| `avg` | Aggregate time slot values into one by taking the arithmetic mean, ignoring `null` | CPU, Traffic, Disk space, etc. |
| `sum` | Sums up values in the time slot, ignoring `null` | Network Throughput, Disk Throughput |
| `value` | Take a single value as-is. | Counters, previously aggregated values |
| `count` | Determines the value count in the time slot, not counting `null` | Response time, Action duration |
| `percentile(N)` | Estimates the n-th percentile, where N in range [0,100) is mapped to p in range [0,1) | Response time, Action duration |

> Percentile aggregations are available for many response time-based metrics. The count is often useful to determine the reliability of quantile estimations. Generally, more samples allow for a more exact estimation or more exact averages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentile aggregations are available for many response-time based metrics. The count is often useful to determine the reliability of quantile estimations. Generally, more samples allow for a more exact estimation or more exact averages.

```
Seems like a mistake. Maybe I'm wrong.

The solution is to combine `:sort` with `:limit`, which keeps the first N results and drops the rest:
```
builtin:host.cpu.usage  
:sort(  
value(avg, descending)  
)
:limit(3)
```
The order of transformations is important for the overall meaning of the query. Transformations are evaluated left to right. Since limit is evaluated after sort, it will only cut off the low-CPU hosts. Writing multi-line selectors like the one in the example can make complex metric selectors more readable.

The result looks promising, but HOST-10000000000000 is not exactly human-readable:
```
metricId,dt.entity.host,time,value  
"builtin:host.cpu.usage:sort(value(avg,descending)):limit(3)",HOST-30000000000000,1610992260000,31.592474088881172  
"builtin:host.cpu.usage:sort(value(avg,descending)):limit(3)",HOST-10000000000000,1610992260000,20.546555923312308  
"builtin:host.cpu.usage:sort(value(avg,descending)):limit(3)",HOST-20000000000000,1610992260000,20.54574979701455
```
Add an additional transformation `:names` to also find out about the hostname:
```
metricId,dt.entity.host.name,dt.entity.host,time,value  

> "builtin:host.cpu.usage:sort(value(avg,descending)):limit(3):names",eu.example.com,HOST-5928C8E47F4BFE45,1610992380000,31.592501233253316  

Reviewer: It's a bit weird that the ME-ID's are different here than 5 lines above.

builtin:apps.web.sessionDuration,APPLICATION-923D6049CBA84FBD,NEW_VISITOR,ROBOT,2019-04-09 13:31:00,4.61475E7
...
```
Chaining multiple transformers together, we can derive a new metric from `builtin:apps.web.sessionDuration` that does exactly what we need. For this, we need `:filter` and `:merge` in our tool box.

Examining the result data we see that additional dimensions tell us whether the numbers were recorded for new visitors or recurring ones and whether the visit was from a robot, a synthetic user or a real user. We are only interested in new visitors that are not robots. Whether they are synthetic or real is irrelevant for our use case.

Dropping robots is easy with :`filter`, which drops results based on a condition. The condition may contain logical connectives and can perform checks on the values of dimension. Our expectations can be formalized as follows: `VisitorType` should be equal to `NEW_VISITOR`, while `VisitType` needs to be not equal to `ROBOT`. This can be expressed in terms of a filter, which we can append to our metric selector:
```
:filter(and(eq(VisitorType,NEW_VISITOR),ne(VisitType,ROBOT)))
```

> We observe that the payload has changed to only contain the result data we are interested in. For each application, two data points remain per timeslot, one for `SYNTHETIC`, and one for `REAL_USER`, while the visitor type is constant at `NEW_VISITOR`. We actually want the average of synthetic and real, so that we have one data point per application. We can easily view them as a combined data point by using a `merge` transformer. It takes the names or indexes of dimensions to remove as arguments, merging data points that have become equal when the dimension is removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We observe that the payload has changed to only contain the result data we are interested in. For each application, two data points remain per timeslot, one for `SYNTHETIC`, and one for `REAL_USER`, while the visitor type is constant at `NEW_VISITOR`. We actually want the average of synthetic and real, so that we have one data point per application. We can easily view them as a combined data point by using a `merge` transformer. It takes the names or indexes of dimensions to remove as arguments, merging data points that become equal when the dimensions are removed:

```

```
:merge(VisitType,VisitorType)
```
Alternatively, we can select only the dimensions to show up in the result and merge the other dimensions. `:splitBy` can be used for an equivalent merge operation:
```
:splitBy(dt.entity.application)
```

> Combining or `:filter` and our `:merge` transformation, we see that we have solved our problem and get the data in the exact format that we need it in:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Combining our `:filter` and `:merge` transformations, we see that we have solved our problem and get the data in the exact format that we need it in:

```

...
```
Note how the semantics of the transformer chain change with the ordering of the transformers. The filter does not make sense after the merge.

We get an error since we just merged the visitor type and then tried to filter on the dimension we just removed.

# Scenario 10: All Service Methods of a Service

>**Task**
>We want to get information for our web service, but by default the data is reported on service method level.

Transformers allow us to shape a metric to our needs. Until now, we have done that by removing dimensions, or by removing result rows. Some transformers also add dimensions, and `:parents` is one of them.

Consider the following problem: The metric `builtin:service.keyRequest.errors.fourxx` is recorded per service method. We are interested in the service methods, but we want to filter the result payload by the ID of the service, namely `SERVICE-0123456789ABCDEF`. We cannot use a scope, since the primary entity is `SERVICE_METHOD` and not `SERVICE`. A `:filter` transformation would work, if the metric contained a secondary service dimension, which it does not. It can easily be added, though, by prepending the transformer `:parents`.

> `:parents` is not only suitable for adding application entities. The general contract of `:parents` is that for each monitored entity dimension, a new dimension will be added before the existing one, if the entity is naturally embedded inside a larger entity of which there can only be one. Disks are a good example. The disk needs the host, otherwise monitoring is not possible. The following have similar disk-like relations that `:parents` is suitable for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`:parents` is not only suitable for adding application entities. The general contract of `:parents` is that for each monitored entity dimension, a new dimension will be added before the existing one, if the entity is naturally embedded inside a larger entity of which there can only be one. Disks are a good example. A disk needs a host, otherwise monitoring is not possible. The following have similar disk-host-like relations that `:parents` is suitable for:

```

| Child Dimension Type | Child Synonyms | :parent Dimension Type | :parent Synonyms |
|---|---|---|---|
| `SERVICE_METHOD` | Key request | `SERVICE` | — |
| `APPLICATION_METHOD` | Key user action  | `APPLICATION` | — |
| `PROCESS_GROUP_INSTANCE` | Process Instance, Process, Instance | `HOST` | — |
| `DISK` | — | `HOST` | — |
| `SYNTHETIC_TEST_STEP` | — | `SYNTHETIC_TEST` | — |

> We try accessing the descriptor for `builtin:service.keyRequest.errors.fourxx.rate:parents` and observe that we have gained a new dimension `dt.entity.service`. We know the ID of the service we are interested in and put the new dimension to use by referencing it in a `:filter` transformer and see that the result data meets our expectations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We try accessing the descriptor for `builtin:service.keyRequest.errors.fourxx.rate:parents` and observe that we have gained a new dimension `dt.entity.service`. We know the ID of the service we are interested in and reference it via the relevant dimension in a `:filter` transformer and see that the result data meets our expectations:

```

"builtin:service.keyRequest.errors.fourxx.rate:parents:filter(eq(dt.entity.service,SERVICE-0123456789ABCDEF))",SERVICE-0123456789ABCDEF,SERVICE_METHOD-13A5BE527CDA803D,2019-04-08 00:00:00,0.0
"builtin:service.keyRequest.errors.fourxx.rate:parents:filter(eq(dt.entity.service,SERVICE-0123456789ABCDEF))",SERVICE-0123456789ABCDEF,SERVICE_METHOD-13A5BE527CDA803D,2019-04-15 00:00:00,0.0
```
If we want to lose the service dimension again after filtering, we can use a `:merge(dt.entity.service)`. The order of transformations is again important. The filter cannot precede the `:parents`, since the dimension does not exist at that point.

# Scenario 11: Apdex for Users of iOS 6.x

>**Task**
>We want to filter a secondary dimension (Operating System) by name, rather than by ID.

Most metrics use entities in at least one dimension. The metric for Apdex split by operating system and version has two entity dimensions and one string dimension, namely the application (primary entity) being measured and the operating system (secondary entity) and version (string) for which the data is valid.

> When we wish to only obtain data for a specific application, of which we know the name, we may use a scope expression with the `entity` predicate. We cannot use the same technique to instead filter operating systems by name, since scopes do not apply to secondary entities, but we may filter secondary entities by name using a transformer chain. For this, we use a combination of `:name`s and `:filter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we wish to only obtain data for a specific application, of which we know the name, we may use a scope expression with the `entity` predicate. We cannot use the same technique to instead filter operating systems by name, since scopes do not apply to secondary entities, but we may filter secondary entities by name using a transformer chain. For this, we use a combination of `:names` and `:filter`.

```

This common transformation pattern looks like a mistake at first, because the output of `:max` is a plain number, which can not be aggregated with `:sum` (only `:value` is supported for plain numbers, which is a no-op) and `:splitBy` as we used it until now does not change the data type being passed through it. In our use case, `:splitBy` _does_ change the output data type, in order for `:sum` to become a supported aggregation type. This feature is often referred to as _bucket inference_, because `:splitBy` and `merge` intelligently decide which data structure (bucket) will be used to collect the merged values, by looking to the right for the next aggregation being applied to the merged values, changing the output data type of the merging.

> Conceptually, you can think of the next aggregation after a `:merge` or `:splitBy` to operate on a list of merged values, supporting any of min, max, avg, sum, median, percentile on that list. Depending on the space aggregation in use, the API will use a suitable data structure to model this conceptual list of merged values (typically a statistical summary or percentile estimator).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conceptually, you can think of the next aggregation after a `:merge` or `:splitBy` to operate on a list of merged values, supporting any of min, max, avg, sum, median or percentile. Depending on the space aggregation in use, the API will use a suitable data structure to model this conceptual list of merged values (typically a statistical summary or percentile estimator).

```

# Scenario 13: Combine Series and Point Queries with Folding

>**Task**
>For a report, we want to query both per-month CPU usage, but also get an overall average.

In some situations, it is useful to transmute a series result into a point result in any position of the transformer chain. One such example is when we want mixed series and point results.

> Say, we want to access `builtin:host.cpu.usage` over the complete last year from January to just before January this year (`now-y/y` to `now/y`). We want a resolution of `1M`, but we are also interested in the average value over the whole year. This can be done in a single bulk query, once using `:fold` and once omitting it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say we want to access `builtin:host.cpu.usage` over the complete last year from January to just before January this year (`now-y/y` to `now/y`). We want a resolution of `1M`, but we are also interested in the average value over the whole year. This can be done in a single bulk query, once using `:fold` and once omitting it:

```

```
GET {base}/metrics/query?metricId=builtin:host.cpu.usage:fold,builtin:host.cpu.usage&from=now-y/y&to=now/y&resolution=1M
```
# Scenario 14: Maximum of Average CPU Usage Values Over Time

>**Task**
>For a chart, we want to draw a line that exactly intersects the peak of the graph.

When can apply what we learned above and query for a series of the average over time and simultaneously query for the maximum over time:
```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg  
builtin:host.cpu.usage:fold:max
```

> The second line merges the statistical data over all time slots, and then extracts the maximum value from the statistical data. This works, but the folded value will be actual maximum sample. If we draw the series and the maximum together into a chart, the folded value may exceed the highest average value, since each value in the chart is actually an aggregate of multiple samples (the average of samples in our case). What if we want to query for the maximum of average values in the chart, not the actual maximum sample?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second line merges the statistical data over all time slots, and then extracts the maximum value from the statistical data. This works, but the folded value will be the actual maximum sample. If we draw the series and the maximum together into a chart, the folded value may exceed the highest average value, since each value in the chart is actually an aggregate of multiple samples (the average of samples in our case). What if we want to query for the maximum of average values in the chart, not the actual maximum sample?

```

For that use case, we want to build a list of averages rather than a list of original samples, and extract the maximum from these averages.

> We can take advantage of the fact that `:splitBy` collects pre-aggregated input values (e.g. averages) into a list if the next aggregation after the merge requires it. If we pass all dimensions of the metric to `:splitBy,` no dimensions will be removed and hence no actual merging will happen, instead we have a list with a single average for each time slots. Before the final aggregation, we need to insert `:fold` so that the lists are merged into one over time. From this merged list, we finally extract the maximum with `:max`. Taking all of this together we end up with this selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can take advantage of the fact that `:splitBy` collects pre-aggregated input values (e.g. averages) into a list if the next aggregation after the merge requires it. If we pass all dimensions of the metric to `:splitBy,` no dimensions will be removed and hence no actual merging will happen. Instead we have a list with a single average for each time slot. Before the final aggregation, we need to insert `:fold` so that the lists are merged into one over time. From this merged list, we finally extract the maximum with `:max`. Taking all of this together we end up with this selector:

```

```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg:splitBy(dt.entity.host):fold:max
```

> The result is exactly what we wanted: the maximum of average values over time - We can draw the maximum into the chart and see that it will exactly touch the peak of the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is exactly what we wanted: the maximum average values over time. We can chart the maximum and see that it will exactly touch the peak of the graph.

```

If you query this selector together with `builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg` you see that the single value is always exactly equal to the maximum entry of the corresponding series.

# Scenario 15: Filtering for Special Characters with Quoting

>**Task**
>We have a filter text field, but the resulting metric selector is invalid if we type in special characters.

Some characters have a special meaning in metric selectors: ( ) : , ~ "

Additionally, white space is used to tell where an identifier such as "dt.entity.host" ends. Replacing the periods (full stops) with spaces would result in three identifiers next to each other, rather than a single one that contains white space.

> If white space or any of mentioned characters are to be used within a dimension name, in a filter matcher reference, or otherwise in their "literal" sense, rather than as syntax, we need to be careful and escape or quote them. Knowing about proper escaping is especially important when we build our selectors in code that handles user input. In such scenarios, e.g. when a user can provide a filter reference in a text field, we want to prevent them from making the resulting selector syntactically invalid or even worse, allow them to change its meaning and insert a malicious piece of code into our selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If white space or any of the characters mentioned above are to be used within a dimension name, a filter matcher reference, or otherwise in their "literal" sense, rather than as syntax, we need to escape or quote them. Knowing about proper escaping is especially important when we build our selectors in code that handles user input (e.g. when a user can provide a filter reference in a text field). In such scenarios, we want to prevent them from making the resulting selector syntactically invalid or, even worse, allow them to change its meaning and insert a malicious piece of code into our selector.

```

> Say, our user legitimately wants to filter for a host with name `Host 14.A "Alice" ~80° (Europe, North Africa)`. This filter reference can not be inserted into the selector as it is, since it contains a period, double quotes, a tilde, brackets, spaces and a comma. In order not to understand these characters and syntax, we surround the string with double quotes, and escape the contained double quotes with a tilde to indicate that the quoted part is not over yet, but that we have an instance of a literal quote:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say, our user legitimately wants to filter for a host with name `Host 14.A "Alice" ~80° (Europe, North Africa)`. This filter reference can not be inserted into the selector as it is, since it contains a period, double quotes, a tilde, brackets, spaces and a comma. In order not to understand these characters as syntax, we surround the string with double quotes and escape the contained double quotes with a tilde to indicate that the quoted part is not over yet, but that we have an instance of a literal quote:

```

```
"Host 14.A ~"Alice~" ~~80° (Europe, North Africa)"
```
Alternatively, we can rely entirely on escaping instead of quoting, but this gets messy real quick:
```
Host~ 14~.A~ "Alice"~ ~~80° ~(Europe~,~ North~ Africa~)
```

> To filter for this name, we can use a combination of :names and :filter and use our quoted version for the filter matcher to end up with a valid selector that uses special characters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To filter for this name, we can use a combination of `:names` and `:filter` and use our quoted version for the filter matcher to create a valid selector that uses special characters:

```

```
builtin:host.disk.avail  
: names  
: filter(  
	eq(  
		dt.entity.host.name,  
		"Host 14.A ~"Alice~" ~~80° (Europe, North Africa)"   
	)  
 )
```

# Scenario 16: Two Metrics with Two Different Entity Selectors

>**Task**
>We want to query multiple metrics at once, and each metric should use a different entity selector.

There is only one `entitySelector` GET parameter, and an entity selector queries for exactly one entity type, but the metric selector can query more than one metric and those metrics could use different entity types.

How can we query the PGI-based metric `builtin:tech.generic.cpu.usage` together with `builtin:host.cpu.usage` with the hosts and process group instances both filtered using a tag "business-critical"?

> This is easily possible by embedding entity selectors into filters using the `in` matcher with the right-hand side of `in` supplied using the `entitySelector` function that sets off an entity query from within a metric selector. Since entity selectors use a lot of special characters, the argument to the `entitySelector` function should always be quoted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is easily possible by embedding entity selectors into filters using the `in` matcher. The right-hand side of `in` can be supplied with an `entitySelector` function that runs an entity query from within a metric selector. Since entity selectors use a lot of special characters, the argument of the `entitySelector` function should always be quoted:

```

```
builtin:tech.generic.cpu.usage
: filter(  
    in(
      dt.entity.process_group_instance,  
      entitySelector("type(PROCESS_GROUP_INSTANCE),tag(business-critical)") 
  	)  
),

builtin:host.cpu.usage  
: filter(  
     in(  
       dt.entity.host,  
       entitySelector("type(HOST),tag(business-critical")  
     )  
)
```

# Scenario 17: Does our Service use Less Memory after the Update

>**Task**
>We want to see the CPU utilization graph of yesterday and the day before yesterday, displayed on top of each other in a chart, so that we can look out for differences.

> A specific process group instance has been running on a new version yesterday. We want to display a graph of yesterdays CPU usage and for comparison, we want the day before layered on top of yesterday. We get yesterday with `from=now/d-d&to=now/d`. This time window can then be moved per each queried metric by using the `timeshift` operator, which takes a time interval to move the data by, but keeping the original timestamps, so that it can be layered on top of the other graph. In our case, with the time frame from before we need `timeshift(-1d)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A specific process group instance ran on a new version yesterday. We want to display a graph of yesterday's CPU usage and for comparison, we want the day before layered on top of yesterday. We get yesterday with `from=now/d-d&to=now/d`. This time window can then be moved per each queried metric by using the `timeshift` operator, which takes a time interval to move the data by, but keeping the original timestamps, so that it can be layered on top of the other graph. In our case, with the timeframe from before we need `timeshift(-1d)`:

```

```
builtin:tech.generic.cpu.usage,  
builtin:tech.generic.cpu.usage:timeshift(-1d),
```

> The second time series is shifted one day into the past, showing data from the day before yesterday, but with the same time stamps as the un-shifted first series. When drawing these into a chart, they will be displayed on top of each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second time series is shifted one day into the past, showing data from the day before yesterday, but with the same timestamps as the first, un-shifted series. When charting these, they will be displayed on top of each other.

```

# Scenario 18: Last Stock Price Yesterday

>**Task**
>We want the last reported value just before midnight yesterday, but if the last time slot contains a gap in the data, we want to go back and instead see the last non-null data.

> To get the latest non-null value, use the `:last` operator, e.g. when the time frame is set to yesterday, but there might be wholes in the data (maybe the stock exchange computers have a maintenance window) we use, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the latest non-null value, use the `:last` operator. E.g. when the timeframe is set to yesterday, but there might be holes in the data (maybe the stock exchange computers have a maintenance window) we use, e.g.:

```

```
stock_price:last
```

> If there is at least one non-null piece of data, the result will use the latest value or otherwise be empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is at least one non-null data point, the result will use the latest value or otherwise be empty.

```

> You can customize the behavior of last by specifying as a first parameter how many entries should be considered from the end of the series (default: all entries), and as a second parameter how many of the last data points should be aggregated together for the final result (default: one, only use the final datum), if you, e.g. want the average of the last three values instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can customize the behavior of `:last` by specifying as a first parameter how many entries should be considered from the end of the series (default: all entries), and as a second parameter how many of the last data points should be aggregated together for the final result (default: one). E.g. if you want the average of the last three values:

```
"datum"?

Sometimes, especially when using the API interactively, it is desirable to use a time relative to the current instant in time when making the request. The API facilitates this by accepting the time anchor `now` with simple arithmetic on top. For instance, minutes (`m`), hours (`h`), weeks (`w`), months (`M`) or years (`y`) can be added or subtracted from `now` using `+` and `-` operators. Furthermore, we support an alignment operator `/` that zeroes parts of the date smaller than the specified unit. Some examples:

| Expression | Meaning |
|---|---|
| `now-1w` | One week before now, same time-of-day as now |
| `now/w` | The beginning of the current week (Monday, 00:00:00.00) |
| `now/w-d` | Also beginning of the week, depending on who you ask (Sunday, 00:00:00.00) |
| `now/M+5m` | Five minutes into the current month |

> Resolution accepts identical units, e.g. `M` or `1M` signifies one month of time between data points. Instead of directly specifying the resolution, a unit-less quantity can be specified that identifies a number of data points that should be equally distributed in the desired query time frame. The API will then choose the most coarse resolution available that will result in at least the desired amount of data points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resolution accepts identical units, e.g. `M` or `1M` signifies one month of time between data points. Instead of directly specifying the resolution, a unit-less quantity can be specified that identifies a number of data points that should be equally distributed in the desired query timeframe. The API will then choose the most coarse resolution available that will result in at least the desired amount of data points.

```

> It is important to note that the resolution is intended as a hint to the server about a preferred count or resolution. When the wish for a resolution cannot be fulfilled exactly, e.g. when requesting eleven minutes between data points, the API will try to find the most satisfying available resolution. Further, the query time frame may not be aligned with how data points are stored internally, causing the API to extend the time frame outwards. For these reasons, the API sometimes returns more data points than requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that the resolution is intended as a hint to the server about a preferred count or resolution. When the wish for a resolution cannot be fulfilled exactly, e.g. when requesting eleven minutes between data points, the API will try to find the most satisfying available resolution. Further, the query timeframe may not be aligned with how data points are stored internally, causing the API to extend the timeframe outwards. For these reasons, the API sometimes returns more data points than requested.

```

```
entitySelector=type(HOST),entityName(important.example.com)
```
This parameter uses the same syntax as the `entitySelector` function within a `:filter`, but instead applies to all queried metrics, not just the one filter. The query parameter always applies to the first entity dimension, never to a secondary dimension, which is only possible with `:filter`.

If you are unsure which `type` to use, consider querying the metric selector of the metric in question and examining its `entityType` field. It holds all possible parameters for `type` that this metric will accept during query.

Dynatrace has a powerful tagging system. It can automatically apply tags to hosts, services, applications or other entities based on many data sources, such as AWS availability zones, CPU architecture, domain names, or similar characteristics. Assuming we want Linux hosts in Europe, and assuming we have configured the tags `Europe` and `Linux`, we may use this scope:
```
entitySelector=type(HOST),tag(Europe),tag(Linux)
```
You can see that compound scope expressions are built by AND-connecting predicate expressions with the comma character.

> Scopes are a powerful concept and explained in more detail in dedicated guide documents. For more information on scopes, the sibling document _Scope by Example_ is available. In-depth discussions of scope concepts can be found in the .

Reviewer: "in the ."
The end is missing.

| `count` | Determines the value count in the time slot, not counting `null` | Response time, Action duration |
| `percentile(N)` | Estimates the n-th percentile, where N in range [0,100) is mapped to p in range [0,1) | Response time, Action duration |

> Percentile aggregations are available for many response- time based metrics. The count is often useful to determine the reliability of quantile estimations. Generally, more samples allow for a more exact estimation or more exact averages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentile aggregations are available for many response time based metrics. The count is often useful to determine the reliability of quantile estimations. Generally, more samples allow for a more exact estimation or more exact averages.

```
I'm actually not sure what the best way is to write "response time based", but it's no right the way it is now 😄

Author: ```suggestion
Percentile aggregations are available for many response-time-based metrics. The count is often useful to determine the reliability of quantile estimations. Generally, more samples allow for a more exact estimation or more exact averages.

```
I'd go this way.
